ARTICLE: Project MUSE - MIKHALPOL’

Pre-1941: Mikhalpol’, village and raion center in Kamenets-Podolskii oblast’, Ukrainian SSR; 1941–1944: Michalpol, Rayon center, Gebiet Jarmolinzy, Generalkommissariat Wolhynien und Podolien; post-1991: Mikhaylivka, Iarmolyntsy raion, Khmel’nyts’kyi oblast’, Ukraine
Mikhalpol’ is located about 30 kilometers (19 miles) south-southeast of Proskurov. In 1897, the Jewish population was 1,392. Under Soviet rule in the 1930s, there was a Jewish kolkhoz close to the village. According to the 1939 population census, there were 728 Jews living in Mikhalpol’ (34 percent of the total population) and 909 Jews within what was then the Mikhalpol’ raion. After the German invasion of the USSR on June 22, 1941, more than 100 Jews managed to evacuate to the east or joined the Red Army. Not more than 600 Jews are estimated to have remained in Mikhalpol’ at the start of the occupation.
Units of the German 6th Army occupied Mikhalpol’ on July 11, 1941. In July and August, a German military commandant’s office (Ortskommandantur) controlled the village. A local Ukrainian named Nachubski was appointed as mayor of the town. In September 1941, authority was passed to a German civil administration. Mikhalpol’ became a Rayon center in Gebiet Jarmolinzy, within Generalkommissariat Wolhynien und Podolien. Kameradschaftsführer Ernst Mertes was the Gebietskommissar in Iarmolintsy. Under the civil administration, the only Germans based in Mikhalpol’ were the agricultural leader (Sonderführer [Landwirtschaft]), Wilhelm Knöchelmann, and his assistant, who were responsible for the various estates in Rayon Michalpol and were subordinated to the Kreislandwirt, Karl Wiegmann, in Iarmolintsy. There was also a squad of more than 10 Ukrainian police based in Mikhalpol’, subordinated to the head of the Ukrainian police in Iarmolintsy. A German Gendarmerie post was not established in the village until after the increase in partisan warfare in the region during 1943.
In the summer and fall of 1941, the Germans implemented a series of anti-Jewish measures in Mikhalpol’. A Jewish Council (Judenrat) was set up as an intermediary body between the Jewish population and the German authorities, and Jews were ordered to wear identifying badges. In addition, Jews were ordered to perform forced labor and forbidden to leave the limits of the village. According to a Soviet postwar publication, in the middle of July 1941, the Ukrainian Nachtigall Battalion arrived from Lwów, and its members took part in the shootings of Jews in the village.
According to the postwar testimony of German agricultural leader Wilhelm Knöchelmann, there was already a ghetto for the Jews in Mikhalpol’ on his arrival there (in around November 1941). He estimated that there were about 100 to 150 Jews in the ghetto, but the actual number was most probably higher. The ghetto was a part of the village, and the Jews were housed separately from the rest of the population. “The ‘commandant’ of these Jews [head of the Judenrat], himself a Jew, often came to me and placed Jews at my disposal for work.” The Jews were used mainly in agricultural work in and around the village.
In late October 1942, the Jews from the ghetto in Mikhalpol’ were rounded up and transferred under close escort to Iarmolintsy by forces of the Gendarmerie and Ukrainian police, including about 14 members of the local police in Mikhalpol’. In Iarmolintsy, all the Jews gathered from Gebiet Jarmolinzy were confined within a derelict barracks compound close to the railway station for a number of days. On the arrival of a detachment of Security Police and SD from Starokonstantinov, under the command of SS-Hauptscharführer Karl Graf, the Jews were shot in groups into three pits prepared nearby. The Ukrainian police were stationed around the execution site to isolate it and to prevent the prisoners from escaping. In total about 6,400 Jews were shot there over the course of about six hours.
During the occupation, which lasted from July 11, 1941, to March 27, 1944, there were 662 residents of the village killed altogether, the majority of whom were Jews. Some 60 Jews were shot in Mikhalpol’ itself. The remainder was killed in   Iarmolintsy. Very few Jews from Mikhalpol’ are known to have survived.
