ARTICLE: Project MUSE - KRIEGSGEFANGENEN-LAZARETTE

The responsibility for the health services and medical care in the Wehrmacht’s prisoner of war (POW) camps* belonged to the Army Health Inspectorate (Heeressanitätsinspektion) through the “Health Manager for Prisoner of War Affairs” (Sanitätsinspizienten für das Kriegsgefangenenwesen), which underwent several reorganizations during the war. The Military Health Regulations (Kriegssanitätsvorschrift), which regulated the entire Army Health Service of the Wehrmacht, were fundamental to the medical care of the prisoners in the Wehrmacht’s POW camps. Regulation No. 300, “Health Service in Prisoner of War Camps,” stated strictly: “The health care and the medical care in the POW camps is to be carried out according to Articles 13–15 of the Geneva Convention on the Treatment of Prisoners of War of July 27, 1929.” These articles regulated health care in the camps; the belligerent nations were required to provide prophylaxis against epidemics and maintain a certain level of hygiene in the camp as well as clean latrines, bathing facilities, sufficient water for bodily hygiene, and opportunities for physical exercise and to “get fresh air.” Patient rooms and isolation rooms for patients with infectious diseases were to be established in every camp. Severely ill prisoners or those requiring emergency surgery were to be treated in nearby military or civilian hospitals. All of the costs of treatment were to be borne by the detaining power, and the patient was to receive treatment according to the type and duration of his illness. The extent to which doctors and health care personnel could be retained in the camps was to be decided through an agreement between the belligerents. Under the Geneva Convention, the prisoners were to receive monthly checkups for their general health and an examination for the presence of infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis and venereal diseases. These requirements for the rights of POWs were established in the regulations for the administrators of POW affairs and for the commanders of the different types of POW camps and the leaders of labor detachments (Arbeitskommandos), in addition to the requirements of the Geneva Conventions.
The transit camps (Durchgangslager, Dulags) had no camp sick bays or hospitals (Lagerlazarette), so prisoners with serious illnesses requiring hospital care, or those suspected of having infectious diseases, were not taken to these camps. Preventing the spread of infectious diseases was an important focal point for the German camp doctor (Lagerarzt), who was responsible for medical care in the camp. Approximately 20 percent of the housing capacity of every camp was to be reserved as a quarantine area. Newly arrived prisoners were to be taken into the quarantine section, initially, and, “ … if necessary, deloused, decontaminated, or, respectively, disinfected,” and only transferred into the main camp after passing an examination. Before they could be transferred to another camp or sent to a labor detachment, they would have to undergo another brief examination. In simply equipped infirmaries (Krankenrevier), there were to be enough beds for 5 percent of the maximum camp population; these facilities treated only the lightly wounded or mildly sick. The camp doctor was responsible for monitoring hygiene in the Dulag’s facilities as well as for determining the causes of any deaths outside of the medical realm and, when necessary, taking steps to prevent the spread of contagious diseases. The doctor was supported in his duties by captured enemy health care personnel in the camp.
In the enlisted men’s main camps (Mannschafts-Stammlager, Stalags), the responsibilities of the camp doctor were similar; he was also responsible for health care and camp hygiene. In addition, the camp hospital operated under the authority of the camp doctor, who was responsible for the administrative functions and served as the disciplinary superior of both the medical staff and the patients. He could requisition the services of any prisoner with medical training while they were in German captivity. As a central element in the care of the prisoners, there was to be at least one doctor for every 1,000 prisoners in the camp, including personnel to fill the positions in the hospital. The health care of the guard units was handled separately and was not the responsibility of the camp doctor.
As in the Dulags, prisoners arriving in the Stalags were also required to enter quarantine and undergo delousing and disinfection as well as an examination and inoculations. Prisoners suspected of carrying infectious diseases were to remain in the quarantine area throughout the incubation period of the suspected illness to prevent the transmission of the illness to the rest of the prisoner population. As in the Dulag, the doctor was responsible for investigating all deaths to establish the cause of death and take any necessary measures against the spread of disease.
Therapeutic measures in the course of normal office hours—sick call—in the infirmary were limited to the treatment of mild illnesses. In the Stalag, regular dental services were also provided, and a dental clinic was established with regular office hours twice a week, and emergency dental services provided by civilian dentists.
As in the Dulag, in the course of overseeing the camp’s hygiene, the facilities that dealt with relevant functions, such as the provision of food and drinking water and the disposal of garbage and sewage as well as the facilities that served for disinfection and delousing, had to be inspected. Further, the Lagerarzt was required to perform a “wellness visit” with the prisoners at least once a month as well as general or individual examinations more often, as needed.
Medical examinations and documentation were also required before a prisoner could be transferred to another camp, repatriated to his home country, or deployed in a labor detachment. Prisoners who became ill while working in the labor detachments were, when possible, to be treated by a doctor on-site or a local civilian doctor; necessary hospital care was to be provided in the main camp, if possible, and only if transport back to the camp was impossible was the prisoner to be transported to a reserve hospital (Reservelazarett) or, in exceptional cases, taken to a civilian hospital.  
Medical care for the prisoners in the labor detachments was regulated by the “Service Instructions for the Leader of a Prisoner of War Labor Detachment,” as were the bureaucratic formalities and accounting for the treatment costs, which were to be borne by the German government via the Stalag. In labor detachments of more than 250 people, the establishment of an infirmary under the supervision of the doctor in the main camp was required. The regulations for the Stalags also required that severely ill or wounded patients be repatriated to their home countries as long as their condition permitted. The officers’ main camps (Offizierslager, Oflags) were only required to have small hospitals by the regulations. In severe cases that could not be handled in these facilities, the prisoners were to be transferred to a reserve hospital, a civilian hospital, or the hospital in a Stalag.
The chapters on “medical services” in the regulations for the repatriation camps (Heimkehrerlager, Heilags) laid down the tasks and procedures for the “mixed doctors’ commission (gemischten Ärztekommission),” which was responsible for determining the medical grounds for the prisoners’ repatriation as well as the responsibilities of the camp doctor. Additional details on the tasks, subordinate relationships, and authorities of the camp doctors, on the infrastructure and the operation of the camp hospitals, on the reporting system and medical documentation, on the “service of enemy medical personnel,” and on other questions were regulated by the “Service Instructions for the Camp Doctor of a Prisoner of War Camp and Chief Doctor of a Prisoner of War Hospital.”
The construction and infrastructural requirements for a POW hospital were detailed in part 12 of the “Regulations for Prisoner of War Affairs,” the “Service Instructions for the Necessary Space, Construction, and Fitting-out of a Prisoner of War Camp.” For example, according to the “Space Requirements,” for a camp with 10,000 prisoners, there was to be one infirmary barrack in the reception area (Vorlager). This was to contain a waiting room and an examination room as well as a storeroom, a dental office, quarters for medical personnel, 5 to 6 patient rooms for a total of 90 patients with 6 square meters (64. square feet) of space per patient, and a 10-square-meter (108-square-feet) “separation room” for the isolation of individual patients, along with separate washrooms for the patients, two showers, and separate latrines for the medical personnel, the regular patients, and the isolation patients.
The requirements for the POW hospital, which for these 10,000 prisoners included 300 beds in total at a distance of at least 400 meters (1,312 feet) from the main camp, were defined in a separate “Space Requirement for a POW hospital of up to 300 Beds.” The regulations included separate guard and storehouse barracks, the reception area, and the quarters of the doctors as well as the medical personnel, the barracks for the care and support of the patients, and the facilities for “mentally ill” and isolation patients in “separation barracks.” In addition, the treatment barracks with different rooms (e.g., X-rays, sterilization, operation, and dental offices) and the pharmacy as well as disinfection and laundry were to be part of the hospital area. The personnel requirements for such a hospital were also set forth in these regulations: for every 1,000 prisoners, there was to be one doctor, as well as four additional unit doctors (Abteilungsärzte), and an orderly for each six patients, for a total of 14 doctors and 50 orderlies.
As noted previously, the health care of the prisoners in the different types of camps was dictated and structured by the relevant humanitarian requirements of the Wehrmacht’s instructions. However, these instructions only reflect a theoretical view—the reality of the health care system and the treatment of the prisoners differed from these requirements in many cases. One factor was the high number of POWs, to which one can add bottlenecks in the supply chain and in equipment as well as a lack of available (captured) medical personnel, especially doctors, such that it was impossible to provide health care for the prisoners at the planned level.
We cannot comprehensively and conclusively judge the degree to which the Germans implemented the regulations because of the variations in the local conditions and the circumstances in the individual camps, and especially because of problems with the sources and the current state of research. Thematically relevant historical studies and investigations exist only for individual camps and reflect only impressions and facts from certain points in time. Many of the vital questions about day-to-day medical care and the actual situation of wounded and sick prisoners, such as the process of their repatriation, their chances of being healed, and so forth, can be answered only on the basis of a few reliable individual examples. Alexander Neumann notes in his study that “because of the incomplete source base, creating a complete picture of the medical care for prisoners of war is difficult. It is clear that the regulations were applied differently in each camp and that the unique local conditions influenced the level of medical care that was available.”
Fundamentally, one can assume that the Wehrmacht actually strove to provide at least somewhat sufficient medical care, because it was placing the POWs in work details, and the foremost goal was to maintain their ability to work. Neumann confirmed this in regard to the mission of the duty post of camp doctor, described above: “The camp doctors had to make decisions as to the POWs’ fitness to work. In that, they were supposed to apply the strictest standards so that, in light of the shortage of labor in the German economy, they could select prisoners for at least light labor, instead of declaring them unfit, which would have necessitated sending them home.”
An additional important factor in the treatment of the prisoners was their ethnicity and national origin. Because of Nazi racial ideology and their antisemitic and anti-Bolshevist worldview and beliefs, prisoners from Slavic countries and, particularly, Soviet POWs were deemed to be primitive “subhumans” (Untermenschen) and were, therefore, treated poorly. In addition, the Soviet Union had not ratified the Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 1929. Although the convention required all signatories to treat POWs according to its terms even if the enemy was not   a signatory, Germany nonetheless used the fact that the USSR had not signed as an excuse to abuse Soviet prisoners. Even though the Soviet Union had not signed that agreement, it had signed other humanitarian agreements, such as the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, updated in 1929, and Germany should have observed them. It is clear from the existing scholarship that there was a “hierarchy” in the treatment of POWs, including medical care; at the top were British and American prisoners, followed by prisoners from other Western European countries, then by Southeastern European prisoners, then Poles, and, at the bottom, Soviet prisoners (especially those of Russian ethnicity).
In addition to nationality, the treatment of different groups of POWs was influenced by the desired reciprocal treatment of German prisoners by their countries; the Germans provided better care for prisoners from countries that held large numbers of German prisoners, in hope that those countries would reciprocate. In particular, American and British prisoners were generally treated in strict accordance with the Geneva Conventions. In addition to the medical care they were required to provide for these prisoners under the Geneva Conventions, the Germans afforded them access to X-ray facilities and special infirmaries (Sonderlazarette) that provided services such as eye care and orthopedic surgery for injured limbs and supplied them with equipment like prostheses.
This treatment stands in stark contrast to the shocking conditions that Soviet prisoners experienced. Their camps were overcrowded, often far above the prescribed capacity, resulting in particularly bad hygienic conditions. The prisoners suffered from exposure to the elements, due to being quartered under the open sky or in holes in the ground, as well as malnutrition, which also had a medical-ethical dimension: these living conditions had catastrophic consequences for the health of the prisoners. In addition to infectious diseases, parasites, wounds, and exhaustion, it was above all insufficient nutrition that led to mass death among the Soviet prisoners. Neither the troop commanders nor the medical personnel in the camps, in the Army Health Inspectorate, or in the Armed Forces Health Affairs (Wehrmachtssanitätswesen) attempted to prevent these conditions from developing or to ameliorate them. Adequate medical care for the wounded, sick, or malnourished prisoners was almost never provided. Far more often, their mass death was accepted, and, frequently, prisoners who were sick, wounded, or invalids were released and left to certain death. Deliberate killing of wounded or sick Soviet prisoners was also not uncommon.
Medical experimentation, primarily on Soviet POWs, constituted an additional dimension of crimes against humanity in the context of the medical care of POWs. Often the Army Health Inspectorate arranged for criminal human experimentation on Soviet prisoners, although Wehrmacht medical personnel also undertook such experiments on their own initiative. The most common forms of experimentation consisted of trials of vaccines against typhus, cholera, and dysentery, as well as starvation experiments. A further, particularly repulsive, kind of experimentation consisted of shooting Soviet prisoners with dumdum bullets, which took place in the summer of 1941. Medical experiments on Western Allied prisoners have also been documented. For example, hepatitis experiments were performed on British prisoners captured on Crete in the summer of 1941.
