ARTICLE: Project MUSE - OFFIZIERLAGER (OFLAG) XVII A

The Wehrmacht established Oflag XVII A on June 15, 1940, on a site about 4. kilometers (2. miles) south of the town of Allentsteig (map 4f) in northeastern Austria, on the grounds of what is now the Allentsteig troop training area. Within a   few days, the camp had a population of 4,780 French officers, as well as 174 Polish and 2 Belgian officers (among the French, there were initially around 800 orderlies, who were permanently used for labor; from September 1942, their number was reduced to approximately 400). Departures due to repatriations were repeatedly offset by arrivals from other camps.
                        
                            
                        
Oflag XVII A at Allentsteig. General view of the camp, August 1940.COURTESY OF ICRC.
Oflag XVII A’s staff consisted of 140 men in October 1943, plus 382 men of Company 2 of Reserve Battalion (Landesschützenbataillon) 893 as the guard battalion. The camp commandants were the distinctly pro-French old Austrian Generalmajor z.V. Anton Unger and—in the wake of the “Great Escape”—from late 1943–early 1944, Generalmajor Hans Ehrenberg, a native of Saxony.
The mortality rate among the French officers was not high, although it began to increase toward the end of the war. The total number of French prisoners who met their death in the camp environment (including the military hospitals in Allentsteig, Gneixendorf/Krems, and Vienna) was probably 25 (in addition to approximately 10 Poles).
At the start, the German supply system was not organized, and care packages were not yet arriving, so the prisoners suffered through a period of hunger that lasted until September 1940. After that, physical conditions began to improve. Already, though, two main, overlapping themes had emerged that would dominate the camp’s history: relations with the German camp authorities, and tensions between factions within the camp.
As early as July 1940, the prisoners began to establish what became known as the “camp university.” Sanctioned ex post facto by the First Communiqué of the Minister of Education in the Vichy government, Jérôme Carcopino, dated September 11, 1941, the teaching and research operation was integrated into the French educational system but was hierarchically subordinate to the established universities. In 1944, the camp university had three sections: Sciences (natural sciences), Lettres (humanities), and Droit (law). Theological studies were conducted separately.
For a time, the university, which was anti-Vichy in sentiment, existed in competition with the “Légion du Maréchal” and then the “Centre Pétain,” two pro-Vichy organizations that familiarized the prisoner population with the new French ideology and supported Pétain’s policies. Naturally, the Germans supported those two groups; they attempted to gain the support of the French for a joint “New Europe” in line with Hitler’s policies by accommodating the POWs in their political, intellectual, artistic, and soon sports activities. This encouraged the development of a French camp command with a Représentant général at its head.
Because of the official policy of collaboration, the anti-Vichy “patriots” offered opposition both to the Germans and to Laval’s government in Vichy and its extreme advocates in the camp. The police force that the German commandant created, under Capitaine Georges Brécard, was termed, among other things, the “French Gestapo.” In April 1942, when the Pétainists, besides recruiting for the Legion of French Volunteers against Bolshevism and similar organizations, even began arranging for placement of “voluntary labor in Germany,” the “patriots” known as “Maffia” became active. Essentially, there were around 10 of them, including young Lieutenant Pierre Buchoud. The sometimes-violent efforts at persuasion made by their “raiding squads” were prosecuted by the Germans as “obstruction of the German war economy.” The camp physician, Dr. Lucien Raffalli, was found guilty on this charge and sentenced to two years in the Armed Forces Prison (Wehrmachtgefängnis) in Graudenz (today Grudziądz, Poland). His codefendant Lieutenant Bouillot was still in Graudenz at the end of the war. At the latest in 1944, the Maffia handed over the management of resistance activities to the representative of the French camp command, which had come into being in July 1942.
Gradually, the anti-Vichy forces came to dominate. Raymond Laporte established a Cercle gaulliste toward the end of 1942, and it soon gained access also to the French camp command. The Cercle’s members discussed the vision of a liberal France and allegedly prepared a draft of a French constitution on behalf of Défense de la France, a part of the French Resistance with a more intellectual and theoretical orientation. The university council was the moral authority in the camp, and to some extent it was also involved in the resistance and escape activities in the camp. Soon the key pro-Vichy figures were transferred out of the camp, and the pro-Vichy forces’ influence was marginal thereafter.
Although the confiscations by the Wehrmacht and the procurement of teaching materials, consumable supplies, and research equipment caused the greatest difficulties, the camp university and its library, after overcoming the competing Centre Pétain (which was insignificant after the end of 1942) and integrating almost all the cultural facilities, influenced cultural and intellectual life in the camp and contributed decisively to rebuilding the morale of the French. Furthermore, the protests of members of the camp university as opponents of the Vichy regime had an effect on the German camp   command from the very outset and, for a time, prevented antisemitic measures in the camp. In the end, however, the approximately 150 Jews (including the biologist and embryologist Etienne Wolff) were transferred to the “ghetto” of Barracks 21.
Charitable activity (especially donation campaigns) and cultural life were extraordinarily intense. Le Canard en … K.G., which was published from January 18, 1941, was perhaps the best edited and best illustrated of all the camp newspapers. The impression given of loyalty to Vichy was intended (at least later on) to deceive the German censors, so that faked identification papers, escape maps, and the like also could be produced in the print shop. The camp movie theater, encouraged by the Germans but financed by the French, was used primarily for German propaganda purposes. Secretly, the French filmed Sous le Manteau, a possibly unique documentation of life in a POW camp. There was a camp radio station, in addition to choruses, orchestras, at least one jazz band and 10 drama groups, and a large “open-air theater,” which was used also for religious services as well as a few authorized political ceremonies. These, like the numerous exhibitions, strengthened the internal cohesion of the French.
Relations with the German authorities varied over time. There was little tension at first, when the pro-Vichy elements held sway, but starting in the spring of 1942, a series of small-scale escapes, shootings by the guards, and a general trend toward resistance, which tensions between the factions exacerbated, created more hostility between the two sides. In 1943, after the Pétainists lost power, the atmosphere became calmer—but only temporarily. The resistance movement in the camp used this time to organize itself more thoroughly and eliminate competing structures.
Over the course of the camp’s history, the resistance engaged in a number of activities. These included the preservation of evidence through photos and film; destruction of German propaganda posters and posting of the resistance movement’s own important information; noisy protests; systematic bribery of Germans; provoking brawls; bold escapes; falsification of file cards and documents; “legally supported” utilization of the rights internationally guaranteed to the French; protests in cases that were no longer covered by the Geneva Convention and served only to keep the Germans “on the go”; and at the end of 1942 and beginning of 1943, removal of pro-German French officers from influential positions in the camp leadership.
The culmination of these efforts was the Grande Évasion, the French “Great Escape,” on the nights of September 18–19 and 19–20, 1943. Around 132 prisoners escaped, by way of a tunnel that some claimed should have been obvious to the guards, but an internal German investigation assigned no culpability to the guard force. The Germans recaptured all but 10–13 of the escapees, and proceeded to punish all the prisoners in the camp, collectively. The Germans placed the recaptured men under close arrest for 10–21 days, while civilians who had helped with the escape were severely punished (18–30 months in prison). Ehrenberg, the new German camp commandant, created an additional “ring of defensive fortification” in April 1944, to protect against possible relief attacks or insurrections in the camp.
Some French officers suffered and died because of their Jewish background. Lieutenant Lantz perished in Auschwitz in March 1942, having been deported there after his repatriation or demobilization. A similar fate befell at least seven other French officers: Lieutenants Marx (Auschwitz), Cassagne (April 1945 in Neuengamme), Goudchaux (September 1944), Leborgne (during deportation), de Liocourt (May 1944 in Buchenwald), Henri Jonval (1945 during deportation), and Capitaine Dumesne (died returning from deportation). Paul Franck, however, took his own life to avoid deportation.
Also worthy of mention are at least two other officers from Oflag XVII A who suffered for their (alleged) activities: Capitaine Levacher and Lieutenant Choné, who had allowed themselves to be “transformed” into “voluntary laborers” in Vienna, were arrested for espionage in October 1943 and sentenced to death in Torgau on December 8, 1943; in February 1945, their punishment was changed to forced labor.
In the summer of 1944, the Western Allies’ advance through France cut off communications and care packages, so conditions in the camp worsened considerably. The following winter, they became life threatening.
On April 17, 1945, the evacuation of the majority of the camp inmates began. They were forced to march in the direction of Braunau am Inn; only approximately 250 POWs who were absolutely unable to walk, as well as around 350 réfractaires (“refractory” prisoners), were permitted to stay behind in the camp (according to other sources, 840 men in total).
During the march, around 800 totally exhausted men remained behind at an early stage, in the area of Gratzen (today Nové Hrady, Czech Republic). After liberating them, the Soviets sent the “Gratzener” on another march on May 16, this time in the direction of Odessa. Plucky leaders brought about a late return of the Gratzener via Gmünd.
The majority of Oflag XVII A made it all the way to the Kaplitz (today Kaplice)-Einsiedl (today Mníšek)-Unterhaid (today Dolní Dvořiště) area in the present-day Czech Republic. After the last Germans had vanished, the French raised the tricolor on the early morning of May 6, 1945, and proclaimed a sort of “French zone” between the Americans and the Red Army. A “corps of volunteer fighters” disarmed parts of the German Eighth Army, which was making its way toward the Americans, while Représentant général Gibert himself probably made the contact with Linz, from which the Americans airlifted these French POWs to France in a concerted effort beginning on May 10.
The men remaining in Edelbach took over the camp on May 8 and were liberated on May 9 by a unit of the Red Army, which, however, immediately moved on. American forces liberated Oflag XVII A on May 9–10, 1945. American trucks, under French leadership, picked up the prisoners still in Edelbach around May 16 and took them to Linz; they were then   taken by airlift to France around May 20. Scattered groups in some cases did not reach France until September 1945, in journeys that often were hazardous.
