ARTICLE: Project MUSE - THEBES

Thebes (Thēva) is located 68 kilometers (42 miles) northwest of Athens. After the roundups of Greek civilians during counterinsurgency operations in the Roumeli region, the Italian authorities established a provisional concentration camp (Campo di concentramento provisorio) just to the east of the city of Thebes. Most of the detainees were civilians suspected of aiding the resistance or supporting the underground nationalist organizations (e.g., the Greek National Liberation Front, Ethnikó Apeleytherotikó Métopo, EAM; Greek Communist Party, Kommounistikó Kómma Elládas, KKE; and the Greek People’s Liberation Army, Ellinikós Laïkós Apeleftherotikós Stratós, ELAS). An entry in the Italian Army’s war diary of September 29, 1942, concerning counterinsurgency operations in the area announced that the provisional camp was “to be set up in the area of Levadeia.” An entry from October 6, 1942, noted that there was a demand for the “urgent delivery of barbed wire.” The camp was finally opened at the end of 1942 with 1,500 to 2,000 detainees.
Greek citizens who participated in resistance actions and innocent hostages were sent to the camp. Former prisoner   Lampros Mpourogiannēs reported that a Greek collaborator turned him in to the collaborationist Legionaries, which in turn handed him over to the Italians. He was arrested by the Domokos carabinieri and after a 10-day detention was sent to the Thebes camp. He reported that the camp was new, disorganized, and inadequate. It was fenced in with barbed wire and was staffed by many guards. There were 150 to 200 detainees as hostages, who slept in twos in tents on the ground. The camp lacked basic amenities, such as bed coverings, and most of the prisoners slept in their clothes. The morning roll call was at 9 a.m., and the detainees had to return to their tents two hours before sunset.
Squalor, fear, and hunger were commonplace. Some of the prisoners’ relatives brought them food and clothes, but in general food was very scarce. The daily meal was soup with a little pasta and a small slice of bread weighing about 150 grams (5. ounces). Some detainees earned money in the camp’s black market by selling Ntarí, a millet-based bread of very poor quality. The sanitary conditions were extremely poor: “There was no hygiene whatsoever, dirt and stench, for toilets we used group troughs, we received water by coupon and washing was not compulsory.” Terror reigned in the camp: “Talking of freedom! … [T] here was fear and terror, it was not allowed for more than three prisoners to be gathered outside the tents.”
In the course of the postwar investigations of Axis crimes in Greece, the competent judicial authorities collected data from the communities and municipalities of every prefecture to support any indictments. A name list of nine “citizens of Vaghia murdered by the conquerors” that the community of Vaghia sent on June 7, 1945, to the Eparchos (district head) of Thebes stated that two of the victims were murdered by the Italians and the other seven by the Germans. One of these victims was noted as having died in the Thebes camp. One of the three Italians accused of committing war crimes in Thebes and mentioned in the Central Register of War Criminals and Security Suspects Consolidated Wanted List (CROWCASS) of the United Nations War Crimes Commission (UNWCC) was the Thebes guard, Caporale Cicero Aldo.
