ARTICLE: Project MUSE - KORCZYNA

Pre-1939: Korczyna, town, Lwów województwo, Poland; 1939–1944: village, initially in Kreis Jaslo, then from November 1941, Kreis Krosno, Distrikt Krakau, Generalgouvernement; post-1998: województwo podkarpackie, Poland
Korczyna is located 5 kilometers (3 miles) northeast of Krosno. There were 796 Jews living in the town of Korczyna in 1921.
After the German occupation of Korczyna in mid-September 1939, various German military units were garrisoned in the town for several months. During their stay they requisitioned Jewish houses and forced Jews to work for them as servants. They frequently searched Jewish homes and stores, beating the owners and taking whatever they liked.
In March 1940, a Jewish Council (Judenrat) was established, with J. Rubin as the chairman and Salomon Horowitz as his deputy. Jakob Sprung, Chaskel Lutman (or Lautmann), and Raffael Rachwall were also members.
According to the town’s yizkor book, Korczyna’s Jews were asked to choose their representatives. Apparently, the chairman Rubin and his assistant “Lewitman” (probably Lautmann) disappointed the Jews of Korczyna, as they “took matters into   their own hands and ignored the rest of the Judenrat.” They received a salary from the Germans and had to implement German instructions. Those who failed to pay a monthly tax imposed by the Judenrat had their possessions (e.g., Shabbat candle holders, pillows, clothing, etc.) confiscated by the Jewish Police. The Judenrat asked the Germans for help on occasion. Arrestees were sent to the Krosno prison; there were also cases when Jews were shot in Korczyna.
By April 1940, the Judenrat had opened a soup kitchen serving three meals daily. The poorest received them for free, while others paid 20 to 30 groszy per day.
By September 1940, there were 20 refugees from Kraków, 17 from Łódź, and 15 Jewish families from Germany living in Korczyna. On March 27, 1941, the Krosno Landkommissar ordered the transfer of 119 Jews from Krosno to Korczyna. The same day, the Jasło Kreishauptmann also directed 22 Jews there from Jasło. On April 8, 1941, 75 more Jasło Jews were transferred and housed with the other recent arrivals in Korczyna. Most of them were refugees from Łódź. At this time, a total of 50 refugees from Kraków were living in the village.
In May 1941, a two-man Jewish police force was established. One of the policemen, Naphtali Kirschner, would forewarn the community of raids by the Polish police. In June 1941, Jewish-owned stores were confiscated.
A local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was set up in Korczyna in July 1941 to provide relief for the town’s poor and refugees. It included chairman Salomon Horowitz, Jakub Sprung, and Izrael Isak Denn. The branch was liquidated in September 1941. The reasons for its liquidation included insignificant aid delivered, the small size of the Jewish population, and infighting among its members. For example, Horowitz requested the dismissal of Sprung and Denn as their “age and appearance” made them “unfit for the job.”
An unfenced ghetto located around the market square of Korczyna was set up in November 1941. Poles—most likely—were not evicted from the ghetto grounds and continued to share some houses with the Jewish population. For example, during the ghetto’s liquidation, survivor Rosa Walker and her son Hendrik did not report to the market square, “instead hiding in the attic of the house they lived in, which belonged to [a Pole] Stanisław Pudło.”
In January 1942, the German authorities ordered the Jews to surrender all their fur garments or face the death penalty. The Jews responded and brought even their old worn-out fur hats to the Judenrat, who passed them on to the Germans. Two days later, the Germans searched the Jews’ homes to check for concealed items, but they found nothing, and the town suffered no casualties.
It is not clear who was in charge of the ghetto’s security. According to the yizkor book, Jews were forbidden to leave the Korczyna ghetto by March or April 1942. The Germans posted signs indicating the limits of the Jewish area. Jews could walk to Godele Gutwein’s house, to Herz Halpern’s house, to Mangel Street, to the pharmacy, and to Pszyslowski’s house. Any Jew caught outside this demarcated area faced the death penalty. A. Potocki mentions that a man was shot for leaving “the ghetto” before this, in December 1941. Also, a 38-year-old, Lejb Korb, is registered as having been shot by the police in November 1941; the precise reason why he was killed, however, is not known.
Survivor Aron Neubarth, who moved to the ghetto when rural Jews were brought in (in June 1942), testified that Korczyna’s Jews were allowed to leave the ghetto only for organized labor assignments. Those who were assigned to work at an airfield or on road construction in Krosno would gather daily in the market square, then march from Korczyna unescorted. In the evening they would return to the ghetto—again unescorted. Otherwise, Jews were afraid to leave the ghetto and rarely attempted to sneak out.
By January 1942, the ghetto had 700 Jewish inhabitants. Forced labor continued; approximately 80 men then walked daily to Krosno for snow removal. They were paid a small compensation and given a hot meal by Krosno’s Jewish community. The sanitary commission continued to check Jewish households for signs of contagious diseases, finding none. In May 1942, Jews aged from 6 to 60 years old were vaccinated against typhus. Dr. Bucholz attended to the sick.
The concentration of the rural Jews of the Kreis in ghettos began on June 24, 1942. By that date, the number of Jews in Korczyna had reached 1,200. The JSS branch was reopened on June 28, 1942, most likely due to the increase in the number of ghetto inmates. The reorganized branch was now led by a refugee from Kraków, Aleksander Choczner, with assistance from Wolf Gleicher and pharmacist Jakub Lewaj. They kept the soup kitchen open and organized a day care in the ghetto for 55 children aged four to nine.
All Jews aged 14 to 60 were obliged to work at this time. Women and young girls performed agricultural labor. In June 1942, Korczyna’s Jews were ordered to pay overdue taxes, allegedly outstanding from when the war started.
On July 30, 1942, 300 Jews, who were composed of deportees from Łódź who were living in Krosno, were moved to Korczyna. Due to the lack of lodging, most of them were quartered in the town’s synagogue. Their hygiene was so poor that the JSS ordered free-of-charge hair clipping, shaving, and bathing for all newcomers.
The ghetto was liquidated on August 12, 1942. Korczyna’s Jews were ordered to report to the market square. The Germans possessed a list of all the inhabitants and their addresses. House searches for those in hiding were conducted, while the remaining Jews were sitting in the square. According to Pinkas ha-kehilot, trucks took old and sick Jews to the vicinity of Wola Janicka, where they were then shot. The Rejestr miejsc, however, reports that on the same day the SS and the Gestapo shot several dozen Jewish families in the Wawrzyce Forest; some of their names are available.
As for the remainder of the ghetto’s inmates, women and children were deported to Krosno on trucks, while men walked there under the escort of Ukrainian auxiliary forces. On August 14, 1942, Korczyna’s Jews were deported to the Bełżec extermination camp.  
Out of 140 Jews who were selected to remain and labor in Korczyna, 70 were taken to the Krosno ghetto. In December 1942, they were transferred together with the remaining Jews of that ghetto to the ghetto in Rzeszów and then dispersed among various camps.
