ARTICLE: Project MUSE - REICHENBACH [aka LANGENBIELAU]

On March 8, 1933, the Nazi SS established a “transit camp” in the Social Democratic Party (SPD) community center at Reichenbach, Saxony. Despite the nomenclature, Reichenbach was a concentration camp in everything but name. The commandant was Albert Greiner, and the guards came from SS-Standarte 7. The detainees consisted mainly of Social Democrats but also included Communists and at least two Stahlhelm members. The size of the camp population is not known.
Under the pretext of interrogation, the SS tortured the prisoners. These sessions normally took place at night, after the guards’ drinking binges. Those who did not cooperate faced an escalating series of punishments: 5 blows for “stuttering,” 10 for lying, 15 for “silence,” and 20 for “pausing to think.” These regulations were posted in the former restaurant where portraits of Marxists Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg continued to hang on the walls. Prisoners who fainted under torture were revived with cold water, and the thrashings began anew. To muffle the screams, the guards held a cushion over the prisoners’ faces.
Among the Reichenbach perpetrators were Toni Grunwald and Dr. Kassebaum. Grunwald, a former Communist, forced prisoners to injest castor oil, after announcing his intention of releaving their “thirst.” The camp physician, Kassebaum, berated detainees for “faking” injuries sustained during interrogation.
On March 22, one day after Reich President Paul von Hindenburg officially received Hitler’s government at Potsdam, the SS celebrated by parading battered SPD members through   the neighboring marketplace. At least two torture victims, Social Democrat Hermann Schencker and Communist leader Albert Janka, died as a result of their injuries. Among the Reichenbach prisoners was SPD Reichstag deputy Erwin Hartsch.
On May 11, the camp was moved to the nearby foundry at Greizerstrasse. Reichenbach was disbanded in late May or early June 1933, and its detainees were transferred to the early concentration camps at Zwickau, Colditz, and Sachsenburg.
