ARTICLE: Project MUSE - DOAGA

Doaga is a village in the Putna judeţ (today: Vrancea judeţ), in the province of Moldavia, in eastern Romania near the Siret River. It is 181 kilometers (113 miles) northeast of Bucharest, 150 kilometers (93 miles) south of Iaşi, and 180 kilometers (112 miles) southwest of Chişinău. Administered by the 5th Pioneer Regiment and later the 6th Roads Battalion, the camp was subsequently incorporated into the 1st Rear Area Command. A complement of 32 officers, 41 noncommissioned officers (NCOs), and 501 soldiers was assigned to the camp. The camp’s administrative center was originally based near the camp, in Băltăreţi village (today: this area is near or incorporated into the village of Satu Nou). Officers (and occasionally Jewish medical staff) were quartered in the nearby commune of Cosmeşti.
A labor camp for Jews existed in Doaga from late 1940 or early 1941. The first Jewish forced laborers built the camp from scratch, after digging partially in-ground huts as shelter. Over the next months, a number of large barracks—25 meters (82 feet) long and designed to hold 100 people—were built, in addition to storage halls and lavatories. The barracks were overcrowded, poorly lit, very drafty, and unhygienic. Periodically, new contingents of freshly drafted laborers arrived that exceeded the camp’s capacity, and so they had to be placed outside the camp in barracks belonging to other institutions. This situation persisted well into 1944. Workers slept in their own clothes on the ground, atop straw and paper covered with blankets; later on, some slept on wooden, tiered beds. In addition to a barbed-wire fence surrounding the camp, elevated watchtowers marked the camp’s corners. Machine guns and mobile searchlights were mounted on each watchtower. A group of armed soldiers guarded the camp and patrolled its fences, preventing anyone from approaching the fence. Near the camp for Jews was another camp for Soviet prisoners of war (POWs). This camp was heavily guarded by Ukrainian soldiers dressed in German uniforms and was run completely by the German authorities.
The Jews were brought to the Doaga camp from all over the Old Kingdom of Romania. The number of Jews in the camp varied greatly over the course of its existence. Between 1940 and 1941, thousands of Jews stayed temporarily in the camp on their way to labor camps belonging to other military and civilian institutions. Estimates for this period are as high as 20,000 or 25,000 Jews, but much smaller numbers, somewhere in the region of 2,500, were typical for the later period from 1942 to 1944. Because of the hard labor involved, the Doaga camp deployed only able-bodied men between the ages of 20 and 40. According to the Romanian Army General Staff (Marele Stat Major, MSM), there were 1,697 Jews in the camp on August 23, 1944, but the number fluctuated, as in previous years. The forced laborers included professionals and both skilled (meseriaşi) and unskilled (salahori) laborers.
The camp internees worked in a concrete plant in Doaga that exploited the Siret Valley’s rich sandy deposits. The association with the factory gave Doaga its alternative camp name, the Concrete Beams Brigade (Detaşamentul de Grinzi Beton). Jews and Soviet POWs provided cheap labor, producing prefabricated concrete products needed for the war effort. Freight trains transported raw materials and products to and from Doaga. On these trains’ arrivals, the forced laborers were immediately dispatched, day or night, to unload or load them.
  The camp had a small infirmary to which several Jews with medical training were assigned. Large ovens existed for delousing, but their effectiveness in combating lice was reduced because most laborers lacked a second change of clothes and the barracks were not disinfected. Fortunately there were no deaths from epidemics. However, fatal work accidents were common.
The labor was rough: mixing, carrying, and pouring cement; loading, unloading, and moving heavy concrete beams and cement bags; and gathering and transporting gravel from the Siret River. Those failing to meet work quotas received lashes with a leather belt on their backs. The Jewish forced laborers were routinely threatened with beating and insulted to make them work faster. A sergeant named Codrescu was notorious for hitting forced laborers with a shovel. Work began at 6:00 a.m. and lasted nine hours, with extended hours in summer (and occasional night shifts), six days a week. Jewish cooks prepared the forced laborers’ rations, which consisted of soup and bread or cornmeal once a day. In 1944, these rations were supplemented by tea and a second slice of bread in the morning and evening. Additional supplies from personal funds, local Jewish relief offices, and, occasionally, friendly villagers eased the usual hunger.
Some cultural life existed in the camp. An orchestra consisting of a few instruments (violin, guitar, accordion, and flute) performed music. The Jews composed songs parodying the forced laborers’ experience at Doaga: “In Doaga, in Doaga we have our beating/Yet beating from heaven is broken/The guard lashes your bottom/If you’re caught lazing around/[second stanza] Doaga, Doaga what a site!/I work without ceasing, but do not despair/Should I one day a baron become/The Concrete Beams Brigade/I shall never forget.” Other songs spoke of the Jews’ resilience: “We are Jewish workers, hoivei, hoivei/And we work like lions, hoivei, hoivei.” The Jews also quietly observed the High Holidays.
Escapes occurred, but such attempts always carried the risk of being shot. Often a fugitive would board a freight train at Doaga and hide until reaching the nearest town or city, such as Focşani or Galaţi. After reaching an outside contact and resting a short while, he would sneak back to camp, bringing what he got from the outside, such as money or letters. If caught reentering, the fugitive faced 25 lashes on his naked buttocks. Although painful and humiliating, it was preferable to being listed as a deserter, which brought the risk of court-martial.
In February 1944, the MSM issued recruitment instructions that targeted new groups of Jews for forced labor in the Doaga camp: younger adults (18 to 19 years old), Jews from among those whose permits had been previously canceled by a review commission, and others fit only for light work. Army recruitment centers in Covurlui, Tecuci, Putna, Tutova, Vaslui, and Fălciu, and even as far away as Bucharest, drafted Jews for the Doaga camp. The new Jews were housed in isolated buildings or huts, away from locals, and were instructed to bring with them warm clothes, a blanket, a pillow, a bowl, and a spoon. Regarding compensation, MSM’s order was typically vague: “the rights (payment) of the Jews will be covered through the care of the superior directorate and the Corps Command, according to future orders that will be issued.” This practice translated either into nonpayment or payment of an insignificant amount (2 lei per day).
On August 23, 1944, when Romania switched sides and entered the war against Nazi Germany and its allies, the Doaga camp officers fled, leaving a few soldiers at their posts. Some camp authorities had tacitly encouraged their Jewish assistants to escape even earlier, but most of the Jews walked out when the officers fled. A few days later, amid bombing raids, the Red Army freed the remaining forced laborers at Doaga. In the ensuing chaos, some workers seized a low-ranking camp official. In survivor testimony, the identity and fate of that official remain unclear.
