ARTICLE: Project MUSE - KOPRIVNICA

On April 15, 1941, the Croatian Interior Ministry and local Ustaša militia founded the first camp in the newly created Independent State of Croatia (Nezavisna Država Hrvatska, NDH). It was located in the unused buildings of the Danica chemical factory near Koprivnica, close to the Hungarian border. Koprivnica is more than 77 kilometers (48 miles) northeast of Zagreb. Commonly known as Danica, the camp interned people arrested on ethnic, political, or religious grounds. Common criminals were also detained there. The Serbs formed the largest group of inmates, followed by politically “undesirable” Croats as well as Jews. The Croatian prisoners consisted primarily of members of the prewar political Left. According to historian Anna Maria Grünfelder, some Seventh-Day Adventists were also interned in the camp.
The first camp commandant was Ustaša member Martin Nemec, originally a businessman in Koprivnica who had gone into exile in 1933 and returned in early 1941. At the time, 89 Ustaša members served as guards. Nemec served from mid-April to the end of June 1941. Ustaša member Nikola Herman from Koprivnica then headed the Danica camp until its dissolution in 1942. At its peak operation, there were as many as 100 guards, who were Ustaša militia from the area.
The first prisoners arrived in the Danica camp on April 18, 1941. Ten days later a larger group of 504 people, mostly Serbs from the Grubišno Polje area, arrived. By mid-May the number of inmates exceeded the camp’s capacity of 1,000, yet even more prisoners continued to arrive; among them, for example, 165 Jewish youth between the ages of 18 and 21 from Zagreb entered Danica on May 31. By the end of June the camp population had more than doubled to nearly 2,200. From June 30 to July 15, approximately 1,960 inmates were transported to the Gospić camp, whereas only 76 people were released during the same period. In August 1941, the prisoner population peaked at 2,656, after which many prisoners, mostly Serbs and Jews, were transferred to other camps, initially to Gospić or Jadovno; from December 1941 the men were sent primarily to Jasenovac and the women and children to Stara Gradiška. These transfers were implemented because the camp was seen as insufficiently fortified against partisan activity. By May 1942, Danica was used only to confine common criminals.
                        
                            
                        

A few camp inmates were used as forced labor in digging defensive earthworks in the camp’s vicinity, as well as in work inside the camp. Nothing is known about the deployment of prisoners as workers in firms from Koprivnica. In her account, Grünfelder makes the point that the Ustaša description of this camp as being for “labor service” was propaganda.
Over the course of the camp’s existence, 5,600 people were temporarily detained in Danica. German historian Marija Vulesica estimates that the prisoner population consisted of more than 3,000 Serbs, approximately 1,000 Croats, more than 600 Jews, and about 400 Roma. Most of the Jewish prisoners came from Zagreb, in addition to Bjelovar, Karlovac, Koprivnica, and Sarajevo. Historian Jaša Romano estimated that there were approximately 200 internees murdered in the camp, but recent research by Vulesica indicates that there were up to 300 dead internees. There was a so-called death barrack in the camp, in which many inmates were tortured and murdered. Some of the prisoners who were seriously hurt by the torture were later shot by the guards.
The Jewish community in Zagreb and Koprivnica supported the interned Jews. Unfortunately, the guards confiscated numerous goods and food sent into the camp, as well as parcels sent from individuals.
The Danica camp was dissolved on September 1, 1942. After the end of World War II, the first commandant, Martin Nemec, was condemned to death and hanged in Danica.
