ARTICLE: Project MUSE - CUZMINŢI

Cuzminţi, a village in the Balki raion in the Moghilev judeţ, in the northern part of Romanian-controlled Transnistria (today: Kuz’myntsi, Ukraine), is located 56 kilometers (35 miles) north-northeast of Moghilev-Podolsk. A handful of Jews lived in Cuzminţi in 1939 (census data for this village were not available).
The German and Romanian armies overran Cuzminţi in the second part of July 1941. After a short period of German military occupation, during which time the local Jews were persecuted, the area came under Romanian civil administration at the beginning of September 1941. However, the presence of German authorities in and around Cuzminţi continued well after the transfer of authority. The praetor in the Balki raion was Ştefan Tăutu. The village’s name was romanianized from Kuzmintsy to Cuzminţi (also occasionally spelled Cuzminţ or Cuzmineţ), and the raion became known as Balchi.
The Jews deported from Bukovina and northern Bessarabia in the summer of 1941 arrived in Cuzminţi in October and November 1941. The majority of them entered Transnistria via the Atachi crossing point over the Dniester River and made a short stop in Moghilev-Podolsk, before being marched farther northeast toward the Bug River. The convoys of deportees were robbed of many of their possessions at the entry point into Transnistria, as well as en route to the deportation site, adding substantially to their misery. Once in Cuzminţi, the deportees were placed on the grounds of the local kolkhoz (state collective farm) in its dilapidated structures. It was there that they spent the first winter, which proved deadly for many. In the spring of 1942, the survivors were allowed to move into the village and rent rooms, located along a few streets in an area designated as a ghetto. Multiple families shared a single room.
According to the statistical records of the Health Service of the Moghilev Prefecture, 175 Jews deported from Romania were living in Cuzminţi in October 1942. According to an estimate by Siegfried Jägendorf, president of the Moghilev Jewish Council, 50 percent of the deported Jews in the Moghilev   district perished during the winter of 1941 from cold, hunger, and typhus. It can be assumed, then, that the number of Jews in Cuzminţi at the end of the 1941 deportations was probably close to 350 or more. Indeed, it is claimed that, because of extreme cold and hunger, some 250 Jews perished in the ghetto.
Life in the guarded ghetto was filled with restrictions. Leaving the ghetto without permission was severely punished. Wearing the yellow star became obligatory. All able-bodied men were taken to forced labor, in agriculture as well as providing personal services to authorities. Bribery and barter became essential means of survival. The Romanian local administration, which was their employer, owed them payment for their work, but such payment was delayed (if paid at all).
The Cuzminţi ghetto housed both Ukrainian Jews deported from other parts of Transnistria and Jews deported from Romania. On September 1, 1943, without including the Ukrainian Jews, there were 128 (80 from Bessarabia and 48 from Bukovina) Jews in the ghetto. The repatriation of Jews deported from Romania began at the end of 1943, first with the Jews originally from Dorohoi and the Regat, along with orphaned children and a few other special categories of Jews (for example, former state functionaries, World War I veterans, and widows). A few adult Jews and a few orphaned children from the Cuzminţi ghetto qualified for this early return. The rest remained in place. The ghetto was liberated by the Red Army at the end of March 1944. Some Jews were immediately drafted into the Red Army, whereas others made the dangerous journey back to Romania.
