ARTICLE: Project MUSE - FLÜCHTLINGSLAGER (FL) TSCHIR

FL Tschir existed as a “refugee camp” from the end of September 1942 until November 1942. It was deployed at the Tschir railroad station (map 9d) (today Chir, Volgograd oblast’, Russian Federation), 100 kilometers (62 miles) southwest of Stalingrad (today Volgograd). It was not really a refugee camp, since the inmates were actually forced evacuees. In German documents, the camp was also called a reception camp (Auffanglager), a collection camp (Sammellager), or a prisoner of war camp (Kriegsgefangenenlager)—the last also a misnomer, since the camp did not contain prisoners of war.  
The camp was subordinate to the Sixth Army Rear Area Commander (Kommandant rückwärtiges Armeegebiet, Korück, 585; as of October 1942, Korück 593). Local Command (Ortskommandantur) I/765, at the Tschir railroad station, apparently exercised direct control over the camp.
The Germans built the camp to hold civilians from the city of Stalingrad temporarily, who, by order of the Sixth Army headquarters, were subject to evacuation to the west, because Stalingrad was located in the zone of combat operations. The camp at the Tschir railroad station was a transit camp: from this camp, the Germans sent people by rail to the main refugee camp (Hauptflüchtlingslager) at Belaja Kalitwa (suburb).
The treatment that the prisoners received was horrible: no shelter, food that was inadequate in quality and meager in quantity, and no medical aid; as a result, there were outbreaks of infectious diseases and instances of death in the camp. A description of the civilians’ conditions of confinement in the camp can be found in the testimony of Stalingrad resident Iraida Modina:
After we crossed the Don at Kalach, they told us that we were going to Nizhnii Chir. Mama could no longer walk on her own, and Zina and Mariia led and supported her under the arms. We were afraid they would shoot her. Mariia managed to stop a truck that was driving past, and she asked the German driver to take Mama and me to Nizhnii Chir. “Nizhnii Chir, Nizhnii Chir,” she repeated to the German. He took Mama and me, but after a time, for some reason, he put us out somewhere along the road. Mama was lying on the side of the road, and I was sitting next to her. I was very frightened. I was afraid that my sisters would not find us. Soon thereafter my sisters caught up with us, and we decided to always stay together from then on. When they brought us to the Chir railroad station, the first snow was falling. It was evening, and we looked for a place to spend the night in the freezing weather that had set in. At the station there were some storehouses made of red brick. We went into one of these buildings. There was no one there. Inside the building, we found a cement floor and cement walls. We sat around Mama, leaning our backs against the wall and covering ourselves with a quilt that already had become quite threadbare. After waking up in the morning, the first thing I saw was the quilt, covered with hoarfrost. My sisters woke up. We had to go, but we couldn’t get up. The frozen tendons in our legs would not obey. Slowly we began to rock from side to side, using our hands and arms to push off the floor, until the tendons warmed up from our movements. We stood up, and my sisters took Mama under her arms and led her onto the platform. We were chilled to the bone and felt that we would inevitably get sick (which in these conditions was tantamount to death) unless we could get into a heated building for a short while. Not far from the station was a small wooden cottage, the door of which stood half open. We went into the cottage. It was crammed full of people. The mistress of the house let in everyone who could manage to find room. We stayed in the warm hut for about 30 minutes until the train came to the station for us, and that was enough time to get warm. I remember the mistress of the house. She saved many people’s lives, including ours, at that time.
Stalingrad resident Valentin Nefedov’s testimony supplements that of Iraida Modina:
On foot, we reached the Chir railroad station. The large area around it was fenced in with barbed wire. One may say that we were the last ones to be shoved inside by the Germans, who then shut the “pen.” It was late November, and in the daytime a light rain had already begun to fall. We started looking around: the area was large, almost empty, and they did not allow Russians into the small buildings that were located there. From time to time, cattle cars or simply flatcars were brought up to the station, and people were loaded in like livestock and taken westward. But the rain grew heavier … Luckily for us, Uncle Fedor spotted a rather large pit in the ground, most likely from a small bomb. On top, as a roof, we spread a Persian carpet and oilcloths, and somehow we were sheltered in the “dugout” from the rain, which by now had turned into a downpour. But a large number of people thus were left to get wet out in the open … At night it was freezing, minus 20 degrees Celsius [-4 degrees Fahrenheit] … In this “pen” we also met relatives on my father’s side—his brother’s wife and their two children. The little girl was 4 years old—her mother didn’t let her out of her arms all night long, she kept her warm, shielded her with her own body from the wind, and the little boy, Vitia, was 10. He, drenched like everyone else, pressed his back against his mother’s legs and knees. By morning the little guy had frozen to death…. And in the morning there was groaning at the Chir station.
The Red Army liberated the railroad station and the camp on November 23, 1942, during the initial phase of the Stalingrad counteroffensive.
