ARTICLE: Project MUSE - VENICE

Venice is almost 394 kilometers (245 miles) north of Rome. When the German Army took control of Mestre and Venice on September 9, 1943, the German authorities began to implement the “Final Solution” in Italy. On December 5, 1943, in an urgent communication, Superintendent Cordova ordered the local authorities of the Italian Social Republic (Repubblica sociale italiana, RSI) to proceed with the immediate arrest of full Jews (those without non-Jewish ancestry). The roundup took place during the night of December 5, 1943. It was particularly harsh. A squad of public security agents broke into the houses of Venetian Jews, rousted them from their beds, and arrested them. The police then went to the Venetian Jewish community’s nursing home, broke the locks, and stormed in; the elderly, frightened and stunned, were brutally removed from their beds. These unfortunates were first deported to the Marco Foscarini Boarding School and later transferred to the prison of Santa Maria Maggiore where they awaited dispatch to a concentration camp. Arrests continued on the following days. On December 7 and 8, 105 men and women were registered in the prison of Santa Maria Maggiore, while their 19 children, ages 3 to 14, were confined in three different institutions for minors.
In the week that followed, the Venetian detainees were transferred from prison to the Jewish nursing home, which had been converted into a provincial camp for Jews (campo provinciale per ebrei); its purpose was to detain them for a short time while preparations were made for their transfer to the Fossoli camp. During the 15 days of the camp’s existence, children also arrived from boarding schools in order to be re united with their families.
On December 28, 1943, Superintendent Cordova announced the deportation of some 100 Venetian Jews. Food supplies provided by the nursing home were distributed among those selected. On December 31, the public security commissioner for the Venetian Railways informed the provincial chief of the departure of 93 Jewish prisoners accompanied by a military escort on board a train headed to the Fossoli concentration camp. On January 18, 1944, another deportation train, which included some children, left Venice for the same destination. On February 22, 1944, every one then being held in the Fossoli camp was deported to Auschwitz II-Birkenau. On August 17, 1944, an additional 21 of the 32 patients over 70 years of age were deported from the nursing home, along with their community chief Rabbi Adolfo Ottolenghi, who chose to share the same fate.
