ARTICLE: Project MUSE - SOFIA

Restrictions on Jewish residence in Sofia (Sofiya), the capital of Bulgaria, in the Sofiya oblast, began in January 1941 when the Bulgarian Parliament enacted the avowedly antisemitic Law for the Defense of the Nation. One provision forbade Jews to relocate to Sofia from elsewhere or to change residences at all without police permission. Ghettoization measures followed in late 1942 on the orders of the Commissariat for Jewish Affairs (Komisarstvo za evreiskite vŭprosi, KEV). Unlike occupied Poland where Nazi-imposed ghettos preceded the Final Solution by some two years, in Bulgaria the residential concentration of Jews was planned from the start as a transitional step in the deportation process. The KEV relied on the consistory, the traditional Jewish internal governing body (the equivalent of a Jewish Council), to compile a register of the city’s Jews. The KEV called on state security organizations for enforcement as needed so a Jewish police force was not established.
Organized Jewish cultural life did not have time to adapt to confined conditions in the ghettos; nevertheless, certain defining features of the Nazi-era ghetto did apply to Sofia. Jews, except those in mixed marriages, were forbidden to dwell with non-Jews. Their economic activity was banned or tightly limited. A curfew kept Jews from circulating freely. They had to   surrender their telephones, radios, automobiles, motorcycles, and bicycles. (KEV records show expropriation of 179 automobiles, 605 bicycles, and 94 motorcycles, which excludes those vehicles Jews sold at lower than normal market prices when owner ship was forbidden.) And dwellings were marked by the six-pointed star symbol (evreiski znak) on a placard denoting “Jewish residence” (evreisko zhilishte).
                        
                            
                        

Sofia presented the principal national challenge to the KEV in achieving Jewish segregation because the city was home to some 25,000 Jews. Many resided in a working-class neighborhood called Iuch Bunar. The central Sephardic synagogue was a notable landmark there, located just west of Sofia’s large covered “Hali” market on Maria Luiza Boulevard. Other wise, Iuch Bunar consisted mainly of small-scale enterprises, shops, and shabby tenements inhabited largely but not exclusively by Jews (the actual percentages of Jewish and other inhabitants cannot be determined from existing data). Although not a fashionable part of town, this area lay within easy reach, on foot or by tram, of Sofia’s main commercial and governmental districts.
Ghettoization was imposed in Sofia by a KEV decree on October 20, 1942, restricting Jewish habitation to west of the longitudinal Maria Luiza Boulevard. The KEV pointedly eschewed using the term geto at the time, although the word did later appear in the indictment of the March 1945 trial in Sofia of antisemitic perpetrators. The ghetto comprised Iuch Bunar and part of the adjacent Konyovitsa neighborhood. According to KEV the other thoroughfares demarcating this “Jewish quarter” (evreiski kvartal) were Tsarina Ioanna Street, Alabin Street, Makedonia Boulevard, St. Stambolov Boulevard, Partenii Nishavskii Street, Vladaiska Ruka Boulevard, Vasil Krikov Street, Rishki Prohod Street, Tutrakan Boulevard, Sveti Kiril i Metod Street, and Slivnitsa Boulevard. However, those streets represented just an outer perimeter. The KEV order added that Jews were not allowed to dwell on Tsarina Ioanna or Alabin Streets or on Makedonia or Maria Luiza Boulevards. So as not to inconvenience non-Jews, and in keeping with the projected temporary nature of the ghetto, non-Jewish house holds residing within the designated zone were apparently not required to vacate their premises.
Jews who had lived outside the designated ghetto were now obliged to move inside its perimeters. The KEV seized the abandoned apartments of those somewhat more affluent Jews. Yet despite the discomfort of those directly affected, there were few reasons for alarm (i.e., no wall, barbed-wire fences, or formal checkpoints were constructed). Meanwhile the continued presence of non-Jewish neighbors within the designated quarter helped maintain an outward sense of normality. Most able-bodied Jewish male adults were away on service in forced labor units at the time of the KEV decree. When they returned to their families on winter furlough, the ghetto was already an accomplished fact.
Initial deportation plans pursuant to the Final Solution were agreed to on February 22, 1943, by the KEV chief Aleksandŭr Belev and the SS representative in Bulgaria, SS-Hauptsturmführer Theodor Dannecker. The victims were to include selected Jews from Sofia, Kiostendil, Plovdiv, and several other towns, but word of the impending deportation leaked. In March a National Assembly protest against deportation spearheaded by its vice chairman Dimitŭr Peshev led to a postponement of those plans. The KEV then instigated further controls on Jews while Belev reassessed tactics for resuming deportations.
In April 1943 the Sofia police promulgated restrictions affecting Jews at places outside the ghetto boundary. Those restrictions fell into several categories. The first paragraph of the order named specific cafes that were off-limits to Jews wearing the required yellow star. Subsequent paragraphs likewise designated restaurants, theaters, clubs, museums, libraries, gardens, and parks as being out of bounds for Jews. Jews were not admitted to the Aleksandŭr Nevski Cathedral or the National Assembly or allowed on Tsar Aleksandŭr I Boulevard. They were barred from riding the electric tramways between 7 and 9 a.m. and could not occupy the first car of a tram at any time. Shopping for Jews was restricted to 3:30 to 4:30 p.m. daily. This police order also barred Jews from streets outside the ghetto, at railway stations, or in industrial zones unless their presence was required by work. They were banned from congregating in groups of more than three persons, from attending dances and concerts, and from using public baths. The order required public facilities to post signs stipulating Jews as unwelcome. A hefty fine of 2,000 leva (just over $15 in 1940 U.S. dollars) could be imposed on Jews who violated the ordinance.
Deportations resumed following an abortive demonstration by Jews from Iuch Bunar on May 24, 1943. Police halted the march, beat demonstrators, and arrested hundreds, immediately dispatching them to a concentration camp in the Danube port of Somovit. Massive evictions of Jews from Sofia ensued over the next three months in accordance with Belev’s expanded national deportation plan. In KEV paperwork the stated purpose was “resettlement” (izselvane), the euphemism for shipment into Nazi hands. However, top Bulgarian officials were ultimately dissuaded from approving that step.
  This movement of people resulted in the unforeseen formation of ad hoc ghettos in provincial Bulgarian towns even as the Sofia ghetto was emptied out during the summer of 1943. As Jewish families were ejected from their homes, KEV operatives, working house by house, proceeded to inventory and seize their abandoned house hold possessions. These items were sold at auction to the general public. Proceeds went into a KEV fund for the temporary upkeep of the Jews until their deportation, after which the remaining sum was supposed to be remitted to the state treasury. Meanwhile, shops and businesses confiscated from Jews were consigned to selected trustees having connections to the KEV.
Ghetto restrictions stayed in effect until the end of August 1944 for those few Jews remaining in Sofia during this period who had been exempted from eviction on various grounds.
