ARTICLE: Project MUSE - CONOTCĂUŢI

Conotcăuţi (today: Konatkivtsi or Konatkovtsy), a rural town in the Şargorod raion, Moghilev judeţ, in the northwestern part of what became Romanian-controlled Transnistria, is located 32 kilometers (20 miles) northeast of Moghilev-Podolsk. According to the 1939 Soviet census, there were 2,626 Jews living in the Şargorod raion (census data for Conotcăuţi are not available), representing 3. percent of its population.
The German and Romanian armies occupied the Şargorod raion in late July 1941. After a brief period of German control, authority was transferred to the Romanian civil administration in late August 1941. The new administration romanianized the town’s Ukrainian spelling from Konatkovtsy to Conotcăuţi. In Romanian documents, the spelling of the town’s name appeared variously as Conatcăuţi, Conatchiveţ, and Kanatchivţi. Overseeing the township’s affairs were the Şargorod raion’s praetors, Iosif Dindelegan and Dimitrie Rusu, and its district gendarmes commanders (comandanţii sectorului de jandarmi), Locotenents Vasile Grama and Vasile Mihăilescu. Between 1941 and 1944, the Moghilev judeţ had four prefects whose decisions directly affected the lives of the Jewish deportees: Colonels Constantin Dumitru, Dr. Ion C. Băleanu, Constantin Năsturaş, and Constantin Loghin.
In 1942, Bessarabian and Bukovinian Jews, together with some local Jews, were interned at the camp in Conotcăuţi, which consisted of a horse stable located in the middle of a field neighboring the village. Very little is known about the circumstances under which these Jews were brought to Conotcăuţi or the administration’s intention in bringing them there.   Perhaps, given the village’s rural economy, the goal was for these Jews to work and live off the land. Alternatively, the movement of deportees may have eased population pressures in the Moghilev and Şargorod ghettos, if indeed Jews were transferred from there.
Although the living conditions of the members of the Şargorod ghetto improved by January 1943, thanks to self-organization and material assistance received from Romania, only 10 kilometers (6. miles) away in Conotcăuţi, the situation was disastrous. The absence of work and work tools greatly impoverished the Jews, and their living conditions in the horse stable were poor. On July 8, 1943, the Moghilev Jewish Labor Office, which oversaw Conotcăuţi, dispatched one of its members, Moses Katz, to visit Conotcăuţi. He left an account of the horrific conditions:
One of the important accomplishments of our committee [Jewish Labor Office] was the visit to colonies from this county [Mogilev]. On that occasion, I discovered in Conotcăuţi, in Shargorod raion, in the middle of a field, a long and dark horse-stable where 70 persons lived. They were unfed—men, women, and children living together—and were all naked. These people lived from begging, their appearance repulsive. The camp’s head was Mendel Aronovici, a former banker from Dărăbani, in Dorohoi county [today: Botoşani county, Romania], who lived there in filth beyond description.
Of the 70 Jews held in Conotcăuţi, 42 were listed in the general count of Jews deported from Romania on September 1, 1943. This figure does not include the local Ukrainian Jewish population, which likely accounts for the discrepancy. Of the 42 Romanian Jews mentioned, 27 were from Bessarabia and 15 from Bukovina. The Red Army liberated the village in the spring of 1944.
