ARTICLE: Project MUSE - KINDIA

Kindia (Kinda) is located in western Guinea, 106 kilometers (66 miles) northeast of Conakry, Guinea; 1,301 kilometers (over 808 miles) southwest of Tombouctou, Mali; and 716 kilometers (445 miles) southeast of Dakar, Senegal. A railway line connects Conakry to Kindia. Guinea was part of colonial French West Africa (Afrique occidentale française, AOF) until 1960. From February 12, 1940, to August 1942, the governor of French Guinea was Antoine Félix Giacobbi. The Vichy governor general, Pierre Boisson, directed all internment camps in the AOF established for Allied prisoners of war (POWs). Because Vichy was officially neutral, the prisoners were given internee status.
Before the war there was a French Army camp in Kindia. On November 28, 1940, a group of rebels attacked French officers at that military camp. The French officers and African soldiers quickly lost control, and there was a threat of an attack on the railway. The colonial authorities gradually retook control of the situation and imprisoned the rebels. It is not clear whether the military camp involved in this revolt is the same as the Vichy camp at Kindia that interned Allied POWs. In November 1940, there was another failed mutiny against the Vichy regime in the Kankan camp.
The poor conditions at the Kindia camp were similar to those found at the Conakry camp. There was just enough food to prevent starvation. The British and Commonwealth internees reported that their inadequate rations consisted of rice, beans, and macaroni. For breakfast they had a cup of coffee and a piece of bread. They were not given real dinner plates and instead ate from bowls. After a while they were each given a small napkin. They did not have shoes. Officers and sailors were kept in common quarters in contravention of the 1929 Geneva Convention. Armed with bayonets, the guards led the internees to the lavatory. Despite the poor treatment, the British did not hold their French guards responsible. Rather, they blamed the French high authorities’ lack of imagination and skill for the ill treatment. According to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, Second Engineer Officer Lewis Elliot of the Canadian Merchant Navy is buried in the Kindia Christian Cemetery. An officer aboard the SS Portadoc, he died on May 25, 1941, presumably as an internee at Kindia.
In July 1941, some members of the crew of the Greek steamer, SS Pandias, were sent to the camp at Kindia, and some were dispatched to the Conakry camp. The master of the ship was Captain Petra Panapolous, and most of the crew was British. They had spent 17 days at sea and were not doing well when they arrived in the camp.
